Walkthrough doc for SB Queue example (#520)
tomkerkhove/promitor: docs/walkthrough/index.md

---
layout: default
title: Walkthroughs & Tutorials
---

## Create a Resource Group

Install the [Azure CLI](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/cli/azure/install-azure-cli?view=azure-cli-latest) if you don't already have it.

```bash
az group create --name PromitorRG --location eastus
```

Output: 
```json
{ 
  "id": "/subscriptions/<guid-subscription-id>/resourceGroups/PromitorRG",
  "...": "..."
}
```

## Create a Service Principal

Use the resource group creation output to add a scope to your service principal:

```bash
az ad sp create-for-rbac \
  --role="Monitoring Reader" \
  --scopes="/subscriptions/<guid-subscription-id>/resourceGroups/PromitorRG"
```

Which should output something similar to

```json
{
  "appId": "<guid-sp-app-id>",
  "displayName": "azure-cli-2019-03-29-19-21-58",
  "name": "http://azure-cli-2019-03-29-19-21-58",
  "password": "<guid-sp-generated-password>",
  "tenant": "<guid-tenant-id>"
}
```

Save this output - the app ID, tenant ID, and password will be used later.

## Create a Service Bus Namespace and Queue

> (From the [Service Bus Quickstart](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/service-bus-messaging/service-bus-quickstart-cli))

Reviewer: I think this is very interesting but less relevant for this walkthrough.

We can either add a `Further Reading` section at the end or just remove it I think.

> Before we install Promitor on AKS to start getting the metrics you want out of Azure Monitor, we need to set up the Azure Resource you want to monitor and have it ready to get metrics for (i.e Service Bus, Azure Functions, VM etc.). In this walkthrough we are going to set up a Service Bus queue as an example.

Reviewer: I would move this section to the introductions where it explains what we'll do:
- We'll create a service bus queue and monitor it with Promitor
- We'll deploy Promitor on a Kuberenetes cluster, in this case Azure Kuberentes Service (AKS)
- We'll link Promitor to Prometheus
- Visualize with Grafana

But with some better writing :)

What do you think?

Author: Yes, makes sense. An intro is a good idea

First we'll need to create a namespace. Service Bus Namespaces need to be globally unique, so we won't use a default name in these commands.

```bash
az servicebus namespace create \
  --resource-group PromitorRG \
  --name <service-bus-namespace> \
  --location eastus
```

We'll then create a queue in that namespace:

```bash
az servicebus queue create \
  --resource-group PromitorRG \
  --namespace-name <service-bus-namespace> \
  --name demo_queue
```

Finally, get the connection string for this Service Bus namespace for use later.

```bash
az servicebus namespace authorization-rule keys list \
  --resource-group PromitorRG \
  --namespace-name <service-bus-namespace> \
  --name RootManageSharedAccessKey \
  --query primaryConnectionString \
  --output tsv
```

## Create an AKS Cluster

> (From the [AKS Cluster Quickstart](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/aks/kubernetes-walkthrough#create-aks-cluster))

Reviewer: Same here, interesting but less relevant - Either remove or add to a further reading section at the end

```bash
az aks create \
  --name PromitorCluster \
  --resource-group PromitorRG \
  --node-count 1 \
  --generate-ssh-keys
```	

If the Kubernetes command line tool `kubectl` isn't already installed, you can install it with 

```bash
az aks install-cli
```

Then get your cluster's credentials with

```bash
az aks get-credentials \
  --name PromitorCluster \
  --resource-group PromitorRG
```

Verify your credentials and check that your cluster is up and running with `kubectl get nodes`.

## Install Helm and Tiller

> [Install Helm](https://helm.sh/docs/using_helm/#installing-helm) on your local machine if you don't already have it.

Reviewer: Let's move this to the prerequisites above

```

- Create the service account and role binding specified in the above file with the `kubectl apply` command:

```bash
kubectl apply -f helm-rbac.yaml
```

- To deploy Tiller into your AKS cluster, use the `helm init` command:

```bash
helm init --service-account tiller
```

## Deploy Promitor to your cluster using Helm

In addition to the helm chart, you'll need a values file with secrets & a metric declaration file (these can also be the same file for ease of use). The yaml file below will scrape one metric, queue length, from the queue created above.

```yaml
azureAuthentication:
  appId: <guid-sp-app-id>
  appKey: <guid-sp-generated-password>

azureMetadata:
  tenantId: <guid-tenant-id>
  subscriptionId: <guid-subscription-id>
  resourceGroupName: PromitorRG
metricDefaults:
  aggregation:
    interval: 00:05:00
  scraping:
    schedule: "* * * * *"
metrics:
  - name: demo_queue_size
    description: "Amount of active messages of the 'demo_queue' queue"
    resourceType: ServiceBusQueue
    namespace: <service-bus-namespace>
    queueName: demo_queue
    azureMetricConfiguration:
      metricName: ActiveMessages
      aggregation:
        type: Total
```

> With this file created, you should be able to deploy Promitor with `helm install`. You'll need to be in the top level directory of the Promitor repository for this command to run, or you'll need to edit the chart location.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With this file created, you should be able to deploy Promitor with `helm install`.

First, we need to add a new Helm repo for Promitor:
```

```bash

> helm install ./charts/promitor-agent-scraper \

Reviewer: See https://github.com/tomkerkhove/promitor/pull/539 - We now have a public Helm chart.

Can you use this one please?

  --name promitor-agent-scraper \
  --values your/path/to/metric-declaration.yaml
```

## Install Prometheus

**Note: If you're seeing errors installing Prometheus or Grafana from the Helm chart repository, make sure you run `helm repo update` before digging into the errors more. You might have an outdated copy of the chart.**

Running the deployment command from the previous section should give you an output that includes a script similar to this one:

```bash
cat > promitor-scrape-config.yaml <<EOF
extraScrapeConfigs: |
  - job_name: promitor-agent-scraper
    metrics_path: /metrics
    static_configs:
      - targets:
        - promitor-agent-scraper.default.svc.cluster.local:80
EOF
helm install stable/prometheus -f promitor-scrape-config.yaml
```

> (You can see this output again at any time by running `helm status promitor-agent-scraper`.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can see this output again at any time by running `helm status promitor-agent-scraper`.
```

Running these commands will create a Prometheus scraping configuration file in your current directory and deploy Prometheus to your cluster with that scraping configuration in addition to the default.

## Add load to the queue

> Now we'll add load to our Service Bus queue so there are meaningful metrics for Promitor to pick up. The easiest way to do this is via the [Service Bus Explorer](https://github.com/paolosalvatori/ServiceBusExplorer/releases). Download and unzip the latest release and run the executable inside.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now we'll add load to our Service Bus queue so there are meaningful metrics for Promitor to pick up.

The easiest way to do this is via the [Service Bus Explorer](https://github.com/paolosalvatori/ServiceBusExplorer/releases) where you can download, unzip and run the latest release as an executable.

Alternatively you can install it via Chocolatey:
<code sample but suggestions doesn't like this>
choco install servicebusexplorer
<code sample but suggestions doesn't like this>
```

Author: Moved Service Bus Explorer install to the prereq section instead

In Service Bus Explorer, you can connect to your namespace & queue using a connection string. From there, right clicking on the queue in the side-bar should give you an option to 'Send Message' - from there, use the 'Sender' tab of that window to send bulk messages. Remember how many you send - you should see that number in the Promitor & Prometheus output.

## See Promitor & Prometheus output via port-forwarding

> Going back to your cluster, you should be able to see all Promitor & Prometheus pods up and running with `kubectl get pods`. You can also see the services - these provide a stable endpoint at which to reach the pods - by running `kubectl get services`. This should give you a list with output similar to:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Going back to your cluster, you should be able to see all Promitor & Prometheus pods up and running with `kubectl get pods`.

You can also see the services which provide a stable endpoint at which to reach the pods by running `kubectl get services`.

This should give you a list with output similar to:
```

| NAME | TYPE | CLUSTER-IP | EXTERNAL-IP | PORT(S) |
| ---- | ---- | ---------- | ----------- | ------- |
| promitor-agent-scraper | ClusterIP | 10.0.#.# | \<none\> | 80/TCP |
| \<prometheus-release-name\>-prometheus-server | ClusterIP | 10.0.#.# | \<none\> | 80/TCP |

> as well as listing the other services deployed by prometheus.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next to that, it should also list other services deployed by Prometheus.
```

> Let's first look at the Promitor output. Run `kubectl port-forward svc/promitor-agent-scraper 8080:80`. Then check http://localhost:8080/metrics - you should see some information about your queue:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's first look at the Promitor output!

Run `kubectl port-forward svc/promitor-agent-scraper 8080:80` and check http://localhost:8080/metrics. You should see some information about your queue:
```

```bash
# TODO sample output
```

> We can also look at the Prometheus server and check that it's pulling in metrics from Promitor. Cancel the previous port-forward command and run `kubectl port-forward svc/<prometheus-release-name>-prometheus-server 8080:80`. Now, if you check http://localhost:8080, you should be able to enter Prometheus queries. Query `demo_queue_size` - as long as all your pods are up and running and both Promitor and Prometheus have scraped metrics at least once, you should see a value that matches the number of messages in your queue.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can also look at the Prometheus server and check that it's pulling in metrics from Promitor.

Cancel the previous port-forward command and run `kubectl port-forward svc/<prometheus-release-name>-prometheus-server 8080:80`.

Now, if you check http://localhost:8080, you should be able to enter Prometheus queries.

Query `demo_queue_size` and as long as all your pods are up and running and both Promitor and Prometheus have scraped metrics at least once, you should see a value that matches the number of messages in your queue.
```

## Set up alerts with Prometheus

**TODO**

## Install Grafana

> Grafana's chart has a few default values you may not want long term - persistant storage is disabled and admin username/password is randomly generated - but for our sample the out-of-the-box install will work. Run `helm install stable/grafana --name grafana` and you should see output that includes this command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Grafana's chart has a few default values you may not want long term - persistant storage is disabled and admin username/password is randomly generated - but for our sample the out-of-the-box install will work. 

Run `helm install stable/grafana --name grafana` and you should see output that includes this command:
```

---
layout: default
title: Deploying Promitor, Prometheus, and Grafana on an AKS Cluster
---

> 

Reviewer: Thinking out loud - Every section is now an h2, would it be easier to follow along if we would use different layers of headers?

For example:
1. Setting up the Azure infrastructure
	...
2. Deploying Promitor & Prometheus
	2.1 Creating a metrics declaration for Promitor
	...
3. Visualizing Metric
	...
4. Alerting
	...

Author: Yes, this is a good idea. I'll reorg when I have a minute 👍

Reviewer: Thanks man! Don't worry, take your time!

## Prerequisites

- The [Azure CLI](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/cli/azure/install-azure-cli?view=azure-cli-latest)
- [kubectl](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tools/install-kubectl/), the Kubernetes command-line tool. It can also be installed via the Azure CLI with `az aks install-cli`.
- [Helm](https://helm.sh/docs/using_helm/#installing-the-helm-client), a Kubernetes deployment manager
- [Service Bus Explorer](https://github.com/paolosalvatori/ServiceBusExplorer/releases)

## Create a Resource Group

```bash
az group create --name PromitorRG --location eastus
```

Output: 
```json
{ 
  "id": "/subscriptions/<guid-subscription-id>/resourceGroups/PromitorRG",
  "...": "..."
}
```

## Create a Service Principal

Use the resource group creation output to add a scope to your service principal:

```bash
az ad sp create-for-rbac \
  --role="Monitoring Reader" \

>   --scopes="/subscriptions/<guid-subscription-id>/resourceGroups/PromitorRG"

Reviewer: Just a thought - Should we scope this on the RG or the Service Bus namespace? Maybe we should be as secure as possible?

Not a blocker though.

Author: I figure RG so that the user could more easily add other resources to monitor if they wanted.

This should give you a list with output similar to:

| NAME | TYPE | CLUSTER-IP | EXTERNAL-IP | PORT(S) |
| ---- | ---- | ---------- | ----------- | ------- |
| promitor-agent-scraper | ClusterIP | 10.0.#.# | \<none\> | 80/TCP |
| \<prometheus-release-name\>-prometheus-server | ClusterIP | 10.0.#.# | \<none\> | 80/TCP |

Next to that, it should also list other services deployed by Prometheus.

Let's first look at the Promitor output!

Run `kubectl port-forward svc/promitor-agent-scraper 8080:80` and check http://localhost:8080/metrics. You should see some information about your queue:

```bash
# TODO sample output
```

We can also look at the Prometheus server and check that it's pulling in metrics from Promitor.

Cancel the previous port-forward command and run `kubectl port-forward svc/<prometheus-release-name>-prometheus-server 8080:80`.

Now, if you check http://localhost:8080, you should be able to enter Prometheus queries.

Query `demo_queue_size` and as long as all your pods are up and running and both Promitor and Prometheus have scraped metrics at least once, you should see a value that matches the number of messages in your queue.

> ## Set up alerts with Prometheus

Reviewer: Maybe move this after creating the dashboard?

Visualizing metric before alerting on it feels more natural to me, but I might be wrong

Author: Sure thing, will do

Set your service's name as the Prometheus URL in Grafana, and save the data source. It should tell you that the data source is working.

## Create a Grafana dashboard for queue metrics

First, we'll make a basic dashboard with the metric we set up in Promitor. Then you can use a pre-built dashboard to show Prometheus' default Kubernetes metrics.

Go to the + button on the sidebar, and choose "Dashboard". To make a simple graph showing your queue size, you can write `demo_queue_size` in the query field. Click out of that input field and the graph should update.

To see more, you can go back to Service Bus Explorer and send or receive messages. Your Grafana graph won't update immediately, but you should see results in a few minutes. 

In order to see results without manually refreshing, find the dropdown menu in the top right corner that sets the time range of the graph. Here you can edit time range and refresh rate.

Make sure to save your new dashboard before exiting the page.

> ## Import an existing Grafana dashboard

Reviewer: This feels more like a `Creating a Kubernetes dashboard`, right? This is great, I'm just wondering if it really matters for this scenario?

We can keep it, but would then suggest changing the name of the section?

Author: We can remove it if you'd like, I just figured it would help users see the full breadth of options they had with Grafana, as the first graph they make is *very* simple. Can definitely kill it if you still don't think it's necessary :+1:

Reviewer: Let's keep it in for now!

Now we'll import a pre-created dashboard that shows Kubernetes metrics. There are multiple available on Grafana Lab's dashboard site - try [6417](https://grafana.com/dashboards/6417).

To import a dashboard, click the + button on the sidebar and choose "Import." From there, you can either load a JSON file or enter the dashbord ID: 6417.

Click "Load" and you will be given some configuration options. The only one that needs to be set is the Prometheus data source. From there, you should be able to create the dashboard and view metrics about your AKS cluster.

> ## Set up a Prometheus alert

Reviewer: See my other suggestion to create a separate issue for this to relieve you. Thoughts?

Author: That would actually be awesome, I have a lot on my plate at the moment. Once I update the grafana section I'll remove the WIP tag & make an issue for alerting.

Reviewer: Sounds great, thanks! And take some time off ;)
